Add Slurm beginner userguide (#413)
mila-iqia/mila-docs: docs/userguides/slurm_guide/basics.md

| `srun`   | Step :material-information-outline:{ title="srun can also be used to directly submit jobs, but we don't recommend it" } | Run tasks | From a job |

Submitting tasks is done through two steps:

1. Request a resource allocation by submitting a job (`sbatch` or `salloc`)
2. Launch commands by launching tasks from this resource allocation (`srun`)

## Discover Slurm through an interactive job

**1. Connect to your favorite cluster (see [this section](../../../getting_started/#verify-your-connection) for more information on the connection)**

=== "Steps"
    
    Open a terminal and launch the command:
    ```bash
    ssh mila
    ```

=== "More details"

    Here, we arbitrary choose to connect to the Mila cluster. The command `ssh mila` works thanks to the configuration we previously set inside `~/.ssh/config`. This could be done by `mila init` (see [the Getting Started guide](../../getting_started/)).

**2. Submit a job**

=== "Steps"

    Submitting a job is like booking an allocation: you request which resources you want (GPU, CPU, node, memory), setting your experiment conditions. The Slurm scheduler is then in charge to provide you an allocation.

    ```bash

>     salloc --ntasks=4 --nodes=2 --mem=2G --time=00:30:00

Reviewer: Je ne recommende vraiment pas `--ntasks` à moins que quelqu'un sait ce qu'il peut obtenir. `--ntasks-per-node` te donnera beaucoup plus de symmétrie dans ta job.

Reviewer 2: Dans les minimals examples, on utilise les deux :

https://docs.mila.quebec/examples/distributed/multi_node/#__codelineno-215-3:5

Ce pourrait être une bonne idée d'utiliser la même chose ici que dans les minimals examples mais que recommanderais-tu d'utiliser? `--ntasks-per-node=2 --nodes=2` ou `--ntasks=4 --ntasks-per-node=2`?

La même questions se poserait peut-être au sujet de `--mem` vs `--mem-per-gpu`?

Reviewer: Pour des raisons de symmétrie, je favoriserais `--nodes=2 --ntasks-per-node=2`, ce qui rend le raisonnement de SLURM extrêmement clair et lucide.

Pour des jobs véritablement insensibles à la géométrie, `--ntasks=4` tout seul suffirait, mais l'utilisateur *doit* être prêt à confronter l'asymmétrie et les choix arbitraires de SLURM.

Reviewer 2: Merci! J'ai créé une issue pour qu'on suive ta recommendation et qu'on mette à jour les minimal examples :) #428 

Mais qu'en est-il de `--mem` vs `--mem-per-gpu`?

Reviewer 3: Personellement je suis plus dans le camp de `--ntasks=4 --gpus-per-task=1`, en d'autre mots, l'option la plus flexible possible.

Si ils veulent ajouter un `--ntasks-per-node=2` ou similaire, fine. Mais ce n'est pas nécessaire

Reviewer 2: Par `flexible`, qu'est-ce qui est entendu ici? Les commentaires plus haut semblerait plutôt indiquer que la solution `--nodes=2 --ntasks-per-node=2` serait la plus flexible en terme de différentes situations supportées, quelque chose qui marche la plupart du temps (`--nodes=2 --ntasks-per-node=2` fonctionnerait dans tous les cas et `--ntasks=4 --gpus-per-task=1` pourrait apporter des problèmes liés à l'asymétrie)? Mais ma compréhension est peut-être mauvaise et tout dépend de si l'asymétrie est régulièrement un problème ou non, ou si l'asymétrie peut causer des problèmes difficiles à comprendre pour l'utilisateur.

Mon grain de sel pencherait vers la solution la plus flexible en terme de différentes situations supportées, une fois qu'elle serait définie.

Reviewer: @lebrice `--ntasks` va _probablement_ te permettre d'être scédulé premier.

Mais est-ce que ta job va performer mieux que la job packée sur un seul noeud (`--ntasks-per-node`)? Non. Et est-ce que tu _t'attends_ à ce que ta job _split_ sur plusieurs noeuds? La réponse est presque invariablement non. J'ai averti plusieurs gens que leurs requêtes avaient splitté sur 2 ou 3 noeuds et que sur les seconds ou troisièmes noeuds c'était du pur gaspillage. Ça n'arrive pas quand tout se passe sur un noeud.

Avant de courrir il faut apprendre à marcher. Avant de _sciement_ lancer des jobs "flex" il faut apprendre à lancer des jobs "single-node" et ensuite des jobs "rigides" "multi-node". Il faut apprendre à réfléchir. Peu de gens franchiront cette étape.

Toi et moi pouvont lancer des jobs flexibles sous toutes les conditions imaginables car nous connaissons SLURM et son mécanisme comme la paume de nos mains. On ne peut supposer dans ce guide que le lecteur le saura. L'audience consiste principalement en des novices. Je ne veux pas leur casser les dents pour le plaisir de le faire. J'aimerais qu'ils suivent un cheminement où ils apprennent et _comprennent_ ce que modélise SLURM. Ensuite, sages de quelque mois, il pourront décider si oui ou non ils devraient lancer des jobs avec `--ntasks` ou `--ntasks-per-node`. Si leurs jobs sont de nature à en bénéficier ou pas.

    * `--time` asks for an allocation of 30min. It is a good practice to set it because an interactive job can last until one week, and it is a common mistake to forget to leave an interactive job.

    See [salloc documentation](https://slurm.schedmd.com/salloc.html) for more information.

**3. Understand where we are**

=== "Steps"

    By running the command `hostname`, you can see "where" the process calling the command runs:

    ```bash
    hostname
    ```
    <div class="result" style="border:None; padding:0" markdown>
    ``` linenums="0"
    cn-f001.server.mila.quebec
    ```
    </div>

    Now, let's try to run steps and tasks by using `srun`:

    ```bash
    srun hostname
    ```
    <div class="result" style="border:None; padding:0" markdown>
    ``` linenums="0"
    cn-f002.server.mila.quebec
    cn-f002.server.mila.quebec
    cn-f002.server.mila.quebec
    cn-f001.server.mila.quebec
    ```
    </div>

    Each task returned its own result for the `hostname` command.

    In this example, we can see that:
    
    * three tasks have been launched on the node `cn-f002`

>     * one task has been launched on the node `cn-f001`

Reviewer: C'est bien ce genre d'asymmétrie qui me fait peur avec `--ntasks` vs `--ntasks-per-node`.

Reviewer 3: Je suis d'avis que c'est bien correct, et qu'il faut juste leur expliquer, pour que leurs jobs soient maximallement flexibles et commencent plus vite. Peut-être qu'on peut mentionner le `--ntasks-per-node=2` comme une option pour restreindre un peu plus le scheduler, au besoin, si jamais ils veulent absolument quelque chose de symmétrique.

Author: Done in 2218a40a63e5731610e263f4b6a583be3f1d20fa :)

---
title: Understanding Slurm
description: Ask for a resource allocation and launch tasks on the cluster.
---

# Understanding Slurm

## Before you begin

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

-   [:material-run-fast:{ .lg .middle } __Get Started with the Cluster__](../../../getting_started/)
    { .card }

    ---
    Obtain a Mila account, enable cluster access and MFA, install `uv` and
    `milatools`, configure SSH access and connect to the cluster for the first
    time.

-   [:material-run-fast:{ .lg .middle } __What is a computer cluster?__](../../../technical_reference/general_theory/cluster_parts/)
    { .card }

    ---
    Understand some notions of what a cluster is. This is an introduction to login nodes, compute nodes and storage nodes.

&nbsp;

</div>

## What this guide covers

> * Discovering the Slurm jobs, steps and tasks

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Discovering the role of Slurm jobs, steps and tasks
```

* Launching multiple tasks through an interactive job
* Launch multiple tasks from a script

## Key concepts

### Jobs, steps and tasks
Recurrent entities when we speak of Slurm are jobs, steps and tasks. If we want to keep a simple scheme, we could say that:

* a job can have multiple steps
* a step can run multiple tasks.

??? info "More information"

>     A **job** can have multiple **steps**. These steps are created when srun is called from inside the job and the slurmstepd created will run the command passed to srun. Each step will have one instance of slurmstepd created per node in the step and each instance of slurmstepd can run multiple tasks in the same step.

Reviewer 3: Je trouve ceci un peu mélangeant à lire. On veut parler de slurmstepd ici?

Author: C'est un extrait de la documentation officielle citée. J'avais un peu peur de perdre de l'information ou de la clarté en paraphrasant, mais on peut supprimer l'encart si c'est mélangeant

Reviewer: Je ne ferais aucune mention de _l'implémentation_, donc de `slurmstepd` entre autres, seulement des abstractions et de l'ontologie SLURM.

À mon avis, mieux vaut formuler ainsi:

> A **job** can have multiple **steps**. A step can be understood as a subdivision of a job, and sub-allocates from the resources allocated to the job. Job steps usually run sequentially (subdivision in time), but they can also run in parallel if they request sufficiently few resources (subdivision in space and resources). Job steps by default request and inherit the same resources as the whole job, but they do not need to. Job steps most naturally map to "phases" of a job: For example, job step `.1` might correspond to a _stage-in_ of the dataset to `$SLURM_TMPDIR`, job step `.2` might run the distributed parallel Python program, and job step `.3` might _stage-out_ the results to `$SCRATCH`.
>
> Job steps are created by `srun` when it is called from inside a job. (Outside of a job, `srun` creates a _job_, an overloaded use of `srun` that is confusing and that we discourage).
>
> A job **step** can consist in one or several **tasks**. A task is a specific instance of the parallel command executed with the `srun` wrapper, and has an associated task ID (rank) _within_ the step: It will be `$SLURM_PROCID`, a number between `0` and `$SLURM_NPROCS`-1 inclusive. The most natural mapping of a task is roughly to one of the main processes in a distributed program. By far the most common usage will be 1 task per node (with a `cp` or `torchrun` sub-launcher), or 1 task per GPU (when avoiding `torchrun` and launching all processes under direct control of `srun`).
>
> While a job step can involve multiple nodes, each *task* will run on exactly one node. A process cannot exist on multiple computers simultaneously.
>
> Control of the number of tasks in a job step is crucial, and some thought about it is critical. In the aforementioned example of a three-step job (`.1` = stage-in of dataset, `.2` = running the distributed program, `.3` = stage-out of the result), one possibility is that step `.1` runs with `--ntasks-per-node=1` (because the dataset should be copied only once _per **node**_), step `.2` runs with `--ntasks-per-node=4` (on nodes with 4 GPUs) or even `--ntasks-per-gpu=1` (_once per **GPU**_); and finally step `.3` would run with `--ntasks-per-node=1 --ntasks=1` to stage out the results only _once per **job**_, from only one node (the first one).
>
> Even within a `task`, there are further levels of subdivision and parallelism possible: A process can create subprocesses ("workers"), and these processes can create multiple threads. However, these concepts are out of scope for SLURM and are more closely related to the Linux kernel's concepts.

Reviewer 2: Excellente explication! Tous devrait le lire, mais j'ai peur que ce soit trop long, qu'ils ne le fasse pas et que ça les bloque dans la lecture du user guide. Est-ce qu'on pourrait mettre ça dans le _tech ref_ et avoir une version simplifiée ici?

Reviewer: Pitch 2, possiblement plus lisible; J'ai essayé de réduire les parenthèses et de rendre certaines connaissances accessibles de manière moins linéaire.

> A **job** can be subdivided into **steps**. A job _step_ sub-allocates from the resources of the job. Job steps are created with the `srun` wrapper command when it is called from _inside_ a job [footnote1]. _By default_ a job step will consume all resources allocated to the job, but this can be changed. Steps most naturally map to _phases_ of a job [footnote2]: For example,
>
>   * Job step `.1` might correspond to a _stage-in_ of the dataset to `$SLURM_TMPDIR`
>   * Job step `.2` might run the distributed parallel Python program, and
>   * Job step `.3` might _stage out_ the results to `$SCRATCH`.
>
> A job **step** can be further subdivided into **tasks**. A _task_ is a specific instance of the command executed in parallel copies by `srun`. Every task has an associated ID/rank _within_ its step (a number `$SLURM_PROCID` between `0` and `$SLURM_NPROCS`-1 inclusive). A task most naturally maps to one of the main processes in a distributed program (but see [footnote3]). While a job/job step can be multi-node, each *task* will run on one and only one node.
>
> In machine-learning work, it is very important to think carefully about how often some things must be done. Some things must be done once **per job**, other things must be done once **per node**, once **per GPU**, or even once **per CPU core**. The number of tasks in a job step is a very important factor in this. One way this can play out, when reusing the three-job-step example above:
>
>   * Job step `.1`: Staging in a dataset should be done once _per node_, because `$SLURM_TMPDIR` is a filesystem private to each node, but can be accessed by all processes of that node.
>       * :arrow_right: `srun --ntasks-per-node=1 --ntasks=$SLURM_NNODES tar -xf $SCRATCH/my_dataset.tar -C $SLURM_TMPDIR`
>   * Job step `.2`: The distributed program must run one main process _per GPU_, because with DDP each process is mean to manage only one GPU.
>       * :arrow_right: `srun` (best), `srun --ntasks-per-gpu=1` (good, maybe redundant) or `srun --ntasks-per-node=4`/`8`/... (worse, hardcodes GPU count).
>       * This is not the only valid choice [footnote3] [footnote4]
>   * Job step `.3`: `$SCRATCH` is shared by every node and every process can see it. To avoid collisions, some jobs might arrange for only only one task overall to write out the job's results.
>       * :arrow_right: `srun --ntasks-per-node=1 --ntasks=1 cp -a $SLURM_TMPDIR/results $SCRATCH/results/$SLURM_JOBID`.
>
> --------
>
> [footnote1] ***Outside*** of a job, `srun` creates a _job_, not a _job step_; This is an overloaded use of `srun` that is confusing and that we discourage.
>
> [footnote2] Job steps usually run sequentially (subdivision in time), because a plain `srun` will use all the resources of a job, but job steps can also run in parallel if `srun` is given arguments that request sufficiently few resources (subdivision in space and resources) that two steps can proceed in parallel.
>
> [footnote3] By far the most common configurations for the tasks of a job's main step will be
>   * 1 task per GPU (`--ntasks-per-gpu=1`), when launching every process of a distributed program directly with `srun`, or
>   * 1 task per node (`--ntasks-per-node=1`), when launching `torchrun`/`accelerate` once per node and allowing them to decide the appropriate number of children processes themselves.
>
> [footnote4] Even within a `task`, there are further levels of subdivision and parallelism possible: A process can create subprocesses ("workers"), and these processes can create multiple threads. However, these concepts are out of scope for SLURM and are more closely related to the Linux kernel's concepts.

Author: This should be added in 357f16b516fdc1fba9f8a50d464fc5e8efe59f95

    [Source - Slurm documentation](https://slurm.schedmd.com/job_launch.html)

### Login nodes and compute nodes
We will not dive into details here, because these concepts have been explained in [What is a computer cluster?](../../../technical_reference/general_theory/cluster_parts/), but to sum up some notions, we focus on the two following types of nodes:

| Type of node | Use |
| ------------ | --- |
| Login node   | They are used to connect to the cluster and manage your jobs |

> | Compute node | This is where the jobs run, the allocation requested when a job is launched is provided from them |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Compute node | This is where the jobs run.  |
```

??? warning "Do not run jobs on login nodes"
    Login nodes are entry points to the cluster, you can call Slurm commands from there (`sbatch`, `sinfo`, `squeue`, etc) but computing scripts should be submitted through Slurm in order to get the requested resources, and not directly run on the login nodes.

### Commands

The three Slurm commands we focus on are:

| Command  | Entity created | Description | From where call the command? |
| -------- | -------------- | ----------- | ---------------------------- |

> | `sbatch` | Non-interactive job | Submit a batch script to Slurm | From a login node |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `sbatch` | Batch job | Submit a batch script to Slurm | From a login node |
```

Author: Est-ce que tout le monde est familier avec la notion de "batch" ou faudrait-il l'expliquer ?

Reviewer 2: `batch Slurm job` est mentionné dans https://github.com/mila-iqia/mila-docs/blob/master/includes/abbreviations.md?plain=1 , si ça peut aider

| `salloc` | Interactive job | Obtain a Slurm job allocation (a set of nodes), execute a command, and then release the allocation when the command is finished | From a login node |

> | `srun`   | Step :material-information-outline:{ title="srun can also be used to directly submit jobs, but we don't recommend it" } | Run tasks | From a job |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `srun`   | Job Step :material-information-outline:{ title="srun can also be used to directly submit jobs, but we don't recommend it" } | Run tasks | From a job |
```

Submitting tasks is done through two steps:

1. Request a resource allocation by submitting a job (`sbatch` or `salloc`)

> 2. Launch commands by launching tasks from this resource allocation (`srun`)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Request compute resources by submitting a job (`sbatch` or `salloc`) with a number of tasks
2. Launch one command per task using `srun`
```

## Discover Slurm through an interactive job

> **1. Connect to your favorite cluster (see [this section](../../../getting_started/#verify-your-connection) for more information on the connection)**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**1. Connect to the Mila cluster (see [this section](../../../getting_started/#verify-your-connection) for more information on the connection)**
```

Author: Est-ce qu'on veut pas rester cluster-agnostic ? Ou c'est une modification pour correspondre au lien de section ?

Reviewer 2: On pourrait rester agnostique, mais dans ce cas on pourrait croire que la mention `getting_started` est pour n'importe quel cluster, et non pas seulement se connecter au cluster Mila. Ou bien mentionner que si on cherche à se connecter au cluster Mila, on peut lire `getting_started`. En même temps, je pense qu'on peut assumer que l'utilisateur ait lu les guides mentionnés dans `Before you begin` et donc on n'a peut-être pas besoin de rediriger encore une fois l'utilisateur vers `getting_started`?

=== "Steps"
    
    Open a terminal and launch the command:
    ```bash
    ssh mila
    ```

=== "More details"

    Here, we arbitrary choose to connect to the Mila cluster. The command `ssh mila` works thanks to the configuration we previously set inside `~/.ssh/config`. This could be done by `mila init` (see [the Getting Started guide](../../getting_started/)).

**2. Submit a job**

=== "Steps"

>     Submitting a job is like booking an allocation: you request which resources you want (GPU, CPU, node, memory), setting your experiment conditions. The Slurm scheduler is then in charge to provide you an allocation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Submitting a job is simple: you request resources (CPUs, GPUs, memory, and number of nodes) along with a number of tasks and the amount of time you expect to need them, and the Slurm scheduler allocates those resources for you.
```

    ```bash
    salloc --ntasks=4 --nodes=2 --mem=2G --time=00:30:00
    ```
    <div class="result" style="border:None; padding:0" markdown>
    ``` linenums="0"
    salloc: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    salloc: # Using default long-cpu partition (CPU-only)
    salloc: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    salloc: Pending job allocation 9311988
    salloc: job 9311988 queued and waiting for resources

    salloc: Granted job allocation 9311988
    salloc: Nodes cn-f[001-002] are ready for job
    ```
    </div>

    Once the allocation is done, you get some information about your job:
    
    * you know what your Job ID is (9311988 in this example)
    * you know on which nodes your allocation is (cn-f001 and cn-f002 in this example).

>     Congrats! You now have a resource allocation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Congratulations! You now have a Slurm job! 
```

> === "More details"

Reviewer 3: I feel like the "more details" should be visible at the same time as the text that it annotates, rather than a side-panel.

Author: Like this?
<img width="1051" height="931" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cf3f2b08-e42a-4bb8-a065-5062cfa9dffe" />

    * `salloc` means this is an interactive job

>     * `--ntasks` means that `srun` will invoke 4 tasks

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * `--ntasks` means that `srun` will run 4 commands (tasks), each with its own share of the job's resources
```

>     * `--nodes` means 2 nodes are requested for the previously mentioned tasks to run on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * `--nodes` means the job's tasks will be running on 2 compute nodes
```

>     * `--mem` aspecify the real memory required per node. We could also set `--mem-per-gpu` or `--mem-per-cpu`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * `--mem` is the system memory (RAM) required per node. We could also set `--mem-per-gpu` or `--mem-per-cpu`
```

>     * `--time` asks for an allocation of 30min. It is a good practice to set it because an interactive job can last until one week, and it is a common mistake to forget to leave an interactive job.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * `--time` is the total time for the job to run. Here we ask for 30 minutes. It is a good practice to set it, otherwise the default time is one week. Forgetting to cancel an interactive job is a common mistake that leads to wasted resources.
```

    See [salloc documentation](https://slurm.schedmd.com/salloc.html) for more information.

**3. Understand where we are**

=== "Steps"

    By running the command `hostname`, you can see "where" the process calling the command runs:

    ```bash
    hostname
    ```
    <div class="result" style="border:None; padding:0" markdown>
    ``` linenums="0"
    cn-f001.server.mila.quebec
    ```
    </div>

    Now, let's try to run steps and tasks by using `srun`:

    ```bash
    srun hostname
    ```
    <div class="result" style="border:None; padding:0" markdown>
    ``` linenums="0"
    cn-f002.server.mila.quebec
    cn-f002.server.mila.quebec
    cn-f002.server.mila.quebec
    cn-f001.server.mila.quebec
    ```
    </div>

    Each task returned its own result for the `hostname` command.

    In this example, we can see that:
    
    * three tasks have been launched on the node `cn-f002`
    * one task has been launched on the node `cn-f001`

> === "More details"

Reviewer 3: Même chose ici, il me semble que les détails devraient être visibles en même temps que le contenu qu'ils décrivent.

    * Note on the command:
        * We used `srun hostname`, presenting the format `srun <command>`. `srun` can also take parameters in the format `srun <parameters> <command>`. See [srun documentation](https://slurm.schedmd.com/srun.html) for more details.

    * Notes on the result:
        * The `hostname` command has been called four times because we ask for four tasks while submitting the job through `salloc`.

>         * By running our four tasks with `srun`, we can see that they are not necessarily evenly spread among the nodes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        * By running our four tasks with `srun`, we can see that they are not necessarily evenly spread among the nodes. If we had used `--ntasks-per-node=2`, then the tasks would be evenly spread across nodes.
        * In certain scenarios, such as distributed training jobs, it can be very useful to stay flexible with respect to the distributions of tasks across nodes, since scheduling such jobs is easier than full-node jobs. Flexible jobs can be scheduled faster, for a moderate performance hit.       
        
```

> ## Launch a non-interactive job

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Launch a batch job
```

In this section, we reproduce the same example as before (same parameters and same command (`hostname`)) and submit the job through the `sbatch` command.

**1. Connect to your favorite cluster**

```bash
ssh mila
```

**2. Write the script**

=== "Steps"
    You could either:

    * write the script directly on the login node (in `$SCRATCH` repository and its children repositories)
        ```bash
        cd $SCRATCH

>         vim job.sh

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        vim job.sh
        chmod +x job.sh
```

Reviewer 3: (Je suis pas certain mais il me semble qu'il faut aussi que le fichier soit éxécutable)

Author: Quand j'ai testé, il était directement exécutable, mais ça peut pas faire de mal et ça peut éviter des soucis :)

        ```
    * or write it on your local computer and copy it to the scratch directory through:
        ```bash
        scp job.sh mila:/network/scratch/s/user.name
        ```

        by using, instead of `user.name` your own name.

    The content of `job.sh` is:

    ```bash
    #!/bin/bash
    #SBATCH --ntasks=4
    #SBATCH --nodes=2
    #SBATCH --mem=2G

>     hostname

Reviewer 3: Super important! Sinon on n'aura qu'un résultat, et ça n'aura servi à rien de demander plusieurs tasks
```suggestion
    srun hostname
```

Author: Wow, merci !

    ```

> === "More details"

Reviewer 3: Même chose ici.

>     We add in the beginning of the script the same parameters we used while running `salloc` for our interactive job. You can notice that we did not add the time here. The parameter exists, and if it is not set, the partition's default time limit is used.

Reviewer 3: I'd rather set a short time than leave it out. This job takes less than a tenth of a second to run, but tells slurm it needs 7 days. It would be best to tell students to ask for the time they need. For example with  `--time=00:00:05` or similar here.

Author: This should be done :)

> 

Reviewer 3: Also, worth noting, maybe as an "extra" or "more details" thing:
The `--wrap` flag of sbatch would allow you to do all this in one line without a batch script, but would be less educational perhaps.
For example:
```bash
sbatch --nodes=2 --ntasks-per-node=2 --mem=1G --time=00:00:01 --wrap 'srun hostname'
```

Author: J'aurais tendance à plus ajouter ça à la référence technique pour creuser un peu plus

Reviewer: Voir ci-haut, je ne suis pas sûr qu'on veule encourager `--wrap`.

```
</div>

Now that the job is submitted, all that is left to do is waiting for it to be scheduled. You can see it status by running the [`squeue`](https://slurm.schedmd.com/squeue.html) command:

```
squeue --me
```
<div class="result" style="border:None; padding:0" markdown>
``` linenums="0"
JOBID     USER    PARTITION           NAME  ST START_TIME             TIME NODES CPUS TRES_PER_N MIN_MEM NODELIST (REASON) COMMENT
9321166 user.name long-cpu,lon      job.sh  PD N/A                    0:00     2    4        N/A      2G  (Priority) (null)
```
</div>

Here, the allocation is requested by sbatch based on the script parameters. Once it is ready, the script is automatically executed (ie the job is running), the allocation is freed at the end of the job.

**4. Retrieve the results**

Once the job is finished, its output can be retrieved by reading the file `slurm-<JOB_ID>.out`. (In our case, the file name is: `slurm-9321166.out`). This can be changed by using the parameter [`--output`](https://slurm.schedmd.com/sbatch.html#OPT_output).

The content of the output in our example is:
<div class="result" style="border:None; padding:0" markdown>
``` linenums="0"

> cn-f001.server.mila.quebec

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
cn-f001.server.mila.quebec
cn-f001.server.mila.quebec
cn-f002.server.mila.quebec
cn-f002.server.mila.quebec
```

```
</div>

> We explain in [this guide](tasks_communication.md) why it does not display the hostname of the four tasks, as it happened in our interactive job, but only one instead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

---

## Key concepts

Job
:   Global commands executed in a requested resources allocation.

Task
:   Set of commands running on an allocation part. A job can contain multiple tasks.

---

## Next step

> Now that we can launch multiple tasks with their own variables (such as hostname), let's learn how to make them communicate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that you can launch multiple commands (such as `hostname`) in a slurm job, each with their own resources and environment variables, you are ready to learn the fundamentals of distributed programs such as distributed training in PyTorch.
```

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

> -   [:material-run-fast:{ .lg .middle } __Synchronizing multiple tasks__](tasks_communication.md)

Reviewer 3: Je n'ai pas encore lu la deuxième partie encore, en toute transparence, mais j'aurais une suggestion: Peut-être qu'on pourrait scinder la PR en deux, et ajouter ce deuxième guide à part?

J'ai l'impression que de donner une base solide en programmation distribuée en PyTorch, en passant rapidement à travers toutes les opérations élémentaires de `torch.distributed`, ça aurait une valeur incroyable pour les étudiants, et qu'on pourrait utiliser un guide Slurm + torch distributed pour justement faire ça, une pierre deux coups.

---
title: Understanding Slurm
description: Ask for a resource allocation and launch tasks on the cluster.
---

# Understanding Slurm

## Before you begin

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

-   [:material-run-fast:{ .lg .middle } __Get Started with the Cluster__](../../../getting_started/)
    { .card }

    ---
    Obtain a Mila account, enable cluster access and MFA, install `uv` and
    `milatools`, configure SSH access and connect to the cluster for the first
    time.

-   [:material-run-fast:{ .lg .middle } __What is a computer cluster?__](../../../technical_reference/general_theory/cluster_parts/)
    { .card }

    ---

>     Understand some notions of what a cluster is. This is an introduction to login nodes, compute nodes and storage nodes.

Reviewer 2: Ce serait à discuter j'imagine mais la façon dont je voyais les guides étaient des éléments self-contained, la base de la connaissance qu'un utilisateur devrait avoir, et en ce sens, `technical_reference` seraient un ensemble d'extras, une couche par dessus les user guides ou les sections plus facile à ingérer, et non pas un prérequis à un user guide.

On pourrait par contre diriger l'utilisateur vers `technical_reference` à la fin du guide, si on a pas peur de les perdre.

Author: Okidacc, je comprends le fait de ne pas le mettre en prérequis.

On en rediscutera, mais je suis plutôt pour le fait d'ajouter des liens vers la référence technique tout de même, mais ça peut être une section "Dive deeper" à la fin ou quelque chose comme ça.

&nbsp;

</div>

## What this guide covers
* Discovering the Slurm jobs, steps and tasks
* Launching multiple tasks through an interactive job
* Launch multiple tasks from a script

## Key concepts

### Jobs, steps and tasks
Recurrent entities when we speak of Slurm are jobs, steps and tasks. If we want to keep a simple scheme, we could say that:

* a job can have multiple steps
* a step can run multiple tasks.

??? info "More information"
    A **job** can have multiple **steps**. These steps are created when srun is called from inside the job and the slurmstepd created will run the command passed to srun. Each step will have one instance of slurmstepd created per node in the step and each instance of slurmstepd can run multiple tasks in the same step.

    [Source - Slurm documentation](https://slurm.schedmd.com/job_launch.html)

### Login nodes and compute nodes

> We will not dive into details here, because these concepts have been explained in [What is a computer cluster?](../../../technical_reference/general_theory/cluster_parts/), but to sum up some notions, we focus on the two following types of nodes:

Reviewer 2: En lien avec le commentaire sur _Before you begin_, je ne suis pas sûr qu'on ait besoin de mentionner des éléments de `technical_reference` dans le contenu du guide, mais ce serait à discuter j'imagine.

Reviewer 2: Un petit changement de temps de verbe si on ne s'attend pas à ce que l'utilisateur ait lu le tech ref avant de lire ce guide.

```suggestion
We will not dive into details here, because these concepts are explained in [What is a computer cluster?](../../../technical_reference/general_theory/cluster_parts/), but to sum up some notions, we focus on the two following types of nodes:
```

Quoi qu'on pourrait aussi juste donner l'info et ensuite, dans une info-bulle ou autre, mentionner que des explications plus poussés se retrouve dans `technical_reference/general_theory/cluster_parts`?

    cn-f002.server.mila.quebec
    cn-f002.server.mila.quebec
    cn-f001.server.mila.quebec
    ```
    </div>

    Each task returned its own result for the `hostname` command.

    In this example, we can see that:
    
    * three tasks have been launched on the node `cn-f002`
    * one task has been launched on the node `cn-f001`

=== "More details"

    * Note on the command:
        * We used `srun hostname`, presenting the format `srun <command>`. `srun` can also take parameters in the format `srun <parameters> <command>`. See [srun documentation](https://slurm.schedmd.com/srun.html) for more details.

    * Notes on the result:
        * The `hostname` command has been called four times because we ask for four tasks while submitting the job through `salloc`.
        * By running our four tasks with `srun`, we can see that they are not necessarily evenly spread among the nodes.

## Launch a non-interactive job

In this section, we reproduce the same example as before (same parameters and same command (`hostname`)) and submit the job through the `sbatch` command.

**1. Connect to your favorite cluster**

```bash
ssh mila
```

**2. Write the script**

=== "Steps"

>     You could either:

Reviewer 2: Je resterais simple ici et je mentionnerais seulement l'utilisation de VSCode comme dans le guide https://docs.mila.quebec/getting_started/train_first_model/#open-vscode-on-a-cpu-node (qui d'ailleurs pourrait être un _Before you begin_ à la place de `getting_started` (puisque `getting_started` est déjà un prérequis à `getting_started/train_first_model`).

J’utiliserais aussi un format similaire pour la description des fichiers slurm. Encore une fois ça peut être discuter sur le format qu'on aimerait utiliser mais je crois que de rester constant dans la doc aiderait les chercher à comprendre un peu plus rapidement la structure du contenu. Je suis ouvert à modifier les autres guides si c'est nécessaire.

Author: Je suis un peu mitigée sur le fait de forcer l'utilisation de VSCode. Mais ajouter une option "le faire avec VSCode" me conviendrait.

Qu'est-ce que tu entends par "un format similaire pour la descriptio des fichiers Slurm" ?

Reviewer 2: L'idée n'est pas de forcer l'utilisation de VSCode, mais plutôt de simplifier au maximum la lecture du guide en utilisant ce qu'on leur a déjà appris. Un peu pour être en ligne avec la recommendation de Manon sur ce que recherche les utilisateurs débutants. De ce que j'ai compris, ils aiment bien les steps by steps et je me souviens d'un cas dans son analyse où un utilisateurs à juste exécuté toutes les commandes présentés plutôt que de lire et comprendre qu'il n'avait qu'à faire l'un ou l'autre.

Mais rien ne nous empêcherait d'avoir un guide particulièrement sur des façon de créer / transférer des fichiers d'un laptop local vers le cluster.

Un format qui utiliserait des tabs comme ici : https://docs.mila.quebec/getting_started/train_first_model/#create-the-project-files . Mais l'idée est surtout de standardiser les choses, si on pense qu'on doit faire autrement on peut faire autrement et je peux modifier les autres guides pour les conformer à au standard qu'on choisira

**4. Retrieve the results**

Once the job is finished, its output can be retrieved by reading the file `slurm-<JOB_ID>.out`. (In our case, the file name is: `slurm-9321166.out`). This can be changed by using the parameter [`--output`](https://slurm.schedmd.com/sbatch.html#OPT_output).

The content of the output in our example is:
<div class="result" style="border:None; padding:0" markdown>
``` linenums="0"
cn-f001.server.mila.quebec
cn-f001.server.mila.quebec
cn-f002.server.mila.quebec
cn-f002.server.mila.quebec
```
</div>

---

## Key concepts

Job
:   Global commands executed in a requested resources allocation.

Task
:   Set of commands running on an allocation part. A job can contain multiple tasks.

---

## Next step

Now that you can launch multiple commands (such as `hostname`) in a slurm job, each with their own resources and environment variables, you are ready to learn the fundamentals of distributed programs such as distributed training in PyTorch.

<div class="grid cards" markdown>

> -   [:material-run-fast:{ .lg .middle } __Synchronizing multiple tasks__](tasks_communication.md)

Reviewer 2: Peut-être qu'on pourrait choisir une autre icône que `material-run-fast`? `material-run-fast` était approprié pour les quick start mais je ne suis pas sûr pour les guides slurm?
